---
title: "Day 1: Introduction to Geospatial Concepts"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What format should I use to represent my data?"
- "What are the main data types used for representing geospatial data?"
- "What are the main attributes of raster and vector data?"
objectives:
- "Describe the difference between raster and vector data."
- "Describe the stregnths and weaknesses of storing data in raster vs. vector formats."
- "Distinguish between continuous and categorical raster data, and identify types of datasets that would be stored in each format."
- "Describe the three types of vectors and identify types of data that would be stored in each."
keypoints:
- "Raster data is pixelated data where each pixel is associated with a specific location."
- "Raster data always has an extent and a resolution."
- "The extent is the geographical area covered by a raster."
- "The resolution is the area covered by each pixel of a raster."
- "Vector data structures represent specific features on the Earth's surface along with attributes of those features."
- "Vector objects are either points, lines, or polygons."
---
This episode reviews the two primary types of geospatial data: rasters and vectors. It will provide an overview of these two types of geospatial data, describing major features of both and providing examples of where you might find each type. 

# Data Structures: Raster and Vector

Raster data is any pixelated (or gridded) data where each pixel is associated with a specific geographic location. The value of a pixel can be continuous (e.g. elevation) or categorical (e.g. land use). This data structure is very common: it's how we represent any digital image. A geospatial raster is only different from a digital photo in that it is accompanied by spatial information that connects the data to a particular location. This includes the raster's extent and cell size, the number of rows and columns, and its coordinate reference system (CRS). 

Some examples of continuous rasters include:

1. Precipitation maps
2. Maps of tree height derived from LiDAR data 
3. Elevation values for a region

Some rasters contain categorical data where each pixel represents a discrete class such as landcover type (e.g., "forest" or "grassland") rather than a continuous value such as elevation or temperature. Some examples of classified maps include:

1. Land-cover/land-use maps
2. Tree height maps classified as short, medium, and tall trees
3. Elevation maps classified as low, medium, and high elevation

> ## Advantages and Disadvantages
> 
> With your neighbor, brainstorm potential advantages and disadvantages of storing data in raster format. 
> 
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > Raster data has some important advantages:
> > 
> > * representation of continuous surfaces
> > * potentially very high levels of detail
> > * data is 'unweighted' across its extent - the geometry doesn't implicitly highlight features
> > * cell-by-cell calculations can be very fast and efficient
> > 
> > The downsides of raster data are:
> > 
> > * file sizes become very large as the cell size gets smaller (more pixels)
> > * currently popular formats don't embed metadata well
> > * can be difficult to represent complex information
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## Important Attributes of Raster Data

### Extent

The spatial extent is the geographic area that the raster data covers. The spatial extent of an R spatial object represents the geographic edge or location that is the furthest north, south, east, and west. In other words, extent represents the overall geographic coverage of the spatial object. 

### Resolution

A resolution of a raster represents the area on the ground that each pixel of the raster covers.

## Raster Data Format for this Capstone

Raster data can come in many different formats. For this capstone, we've offered data in the GeoTIFF format, which has the extension `.tif`. A `.tif` file stores metadata or attributes about the file as embedded `.tif tags`. For instance, your camera might store a tag that describes the make and model of the camera or the date that the photo was taken when it saves a `.tif`. A GeoTIFF is a standard `.tif` image format with additional spatial (georeferencing) information embedded in the file as tags. These tags should include the following raster metadata:

1. Extent
2. Resolution
3. Coordinate Refernce System (CRS) - you'll explore this concept in a later episode. 
4. Values that represent missing data (`NoDataValue`). 

> ## Spatial Questions with Raster Data
> What kinds of geographic questions can you ask using raster data? Brainstorm a few with your neighbor.
> > ## Solution
> >
> > How are precipitation patterns different across space?
> > How does average temperature differ across space?
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## About Vector Data

Vector data structures represent specific features on the Earth's surface, and assign attributes to those features. Vectors are composed of discrete geometric locations (x, y values) known as vertices that define the shape of the spatial object. The organization of the vertices determines the type of vector that we are working with: point, line, or polygon. 

* **Points:** Each point is defined by a single x, y coordinate. There can be many points in a vector point file. Examples of point data include: sampling locations, the location of individual trees, or the location of survey plots. 

* **Lines:** Lines are composed of many (at least 2) points that are connected. For instance, a road or a stream may be represented by a line. This line is composed of a series of segments, each "bend" in the road or stream represents a vertex that has a defined x, y location. 

* **Polygons:** A polygon consists of 3 or more vertices that are connected and closed. The outlines of survey plot boundaries, lakes, oceans, and states or countries are often represented by polygons. 

> # Data Tip
>
> Sometimes, boundary layers such as states and countries, are stored as lines
>  rather than polygons. However, these boundaries, when represented as a line,
>  will not create a closed object with a defined area that can be filled.
{: .callout}


> ## Advantages and Disadvantages
> 
> With your neighbor, brainstorm potential advantages and disadvantages of using vector data. 
> 
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > Vector data has some important advantages:
> > 
> > * the geometry itself contains information about what the dataset creator thought was important
> > * the geometry structures hold information in themselves — why choose point over polygon, for instance?
> > * each geometry feature can carry multiple attributes instead of just one, e.g. a database of cities can have attributes for name, country, population, etc. 
> > * data storage can be very efficient compared to rasters
> > 
> > The downsides of vector data are:
> > 
> > * potential loss of detail compared to raster
> > * potential bias in datasets — what didn't get recorded?
> > * calculations involving multiple vector layers need to do math on the geometry as well as on the attributes, so can be slow compared to raster math. 
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

{% include links.md %}

